Improvement actions

    FRANCE




                      1
   Peer reviewers’ recommendations and
improvement actions of the national statistical
   system of FRANCE in response to the
             recommendations




                                        March 2022

                                                 2
I- Strengthening the Institutional Environment

1. Recommendation:
The ASP, INSEE and related ministries should apply greater transparency in the processes gov-
erning the appointment of the Director-General of INSEE and of certain SSMs, with particular
focus on the commencement of the processes. (Compliance-relevant: ES CoP, Indicator 1.8)
Current situation:
The Director-General of INSEE, as well as those heads of SSMs who are directors of central
administration, are appointed by the French President through a decree of the Council of Ministers.
The peer review team noted the introduction in 2016 of a Hearing Committee (Decree No 2016-
663 of 24 May 2016) to oversee appointments of heads of all French ministerial departments who
are directors of central administration or equivalent. The membership of this committee includes at
least four people, one of whom works within the ministry with the job vacancy, one member who is
external to this ministry, one member qualified in the fields of competence of the job to be filled
and one member with expertise in human resource skills. Although there is no specific reference in
the decree in this regard, a member of the ASP may participate in this Hearing Committee for the
appointments of the Director-General of INSEE and those heads of SSMs who are directors of
central administration. Furthermore, the ASP can put forward an opinion during the nomination
process. This opinion is addressed to the Hearing Committee and relates to the professional
competencies of the candidates being considered for appointment in accordance with the principle
of professional independence as laid down in the ES CoP. The view expressed by the ASP on the
selected candidate is published in the French Official Journal at the same time as the appointment
decision.
However, the peer review team considers that a lack of transparency in the appointment procedures,
particularly at the commencement of the recruitment process and the advertisement of the vacancy
for the Director-General of INSEE and the heads of SSMs who are directors of central
administration, remains a weakness in the French system that has the potential to impact negatively
on the perception of the professional independence of INSEE and the wider statistical system.
Improvement action: Description of the DCAs’ process of appointing
A1.1 - The French Official Statistics Authority intends to draw up, by the end of 2022, a specific
document clearly explaining and contextualising the established process of appointing the Director-
General of INSEE or those heads of Ministerial Statistical Offices who are directors of central
administration (DCAs).
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: ASP
Improvement action: Publication of the DCA’s process of appointing
A1.2 - The French Official Statistics Authority along with INSEE intend to make reference on their
respective websites to a document clearly explaining and contextualising the established process of
appointing the Director-General of INSEE or those heads of Ministerial Statistical Offices who are
directors of central administration .
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: ASP and
INSEE




                                                                                                  3
2. Recommendation:
Expanding on their role in the appointment of the Director-General of INSEE and certain SSMs,
the ASP should also have, in connection with the INSEE Director-General, an involvement in the
appointment of heads of SSM for roles other than those at the level of directors of central
administration. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 1.8)
Current situation:
The heads of SSMs who are not directors of central administration are recruited following a
process starting with the publication of a vacancy notice. However, the ASP is not involved in such
appointment procedures and has no mandate to put forward an opinion on the candidates.
Improvement action: Description of the appointment process of heads of MSO who are not
DCA
A2.1 - The French Official Statistics Authority along with INSEE intend to publish, by the end of
2022, on their own websites, a commonly agreed document clearly describing their respective roles
in the appointment process of those heads of Ministerial Statistical Offices who are not directors of
central administration (DCAs).
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: ASP and
INSEE
Improvement action: Publication of the appointment process on MSO’s websites
A2.2 – The Ministerial Statistical Offices concerned intend to make reference - as far as possible
on their own websites - by the end of 2022, to the agreed document established by the French
Official Statistics Authority and INSEE describing their respective roles in the appointment process
of heads of MSO who are not directors of central administration.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs
concerned




                                                                                                    4
3. Recommendation:
The ASP, INSEE, SSMs and their relevant ministries should complete progressively the inclusion
of clear statements on professional independence in the decrees of all ministries of SSMs.
(Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 1.3)
Current situation:
On the independence of the SSP, the peer review team noted the ASP recommendation for inclusion
of a clear statement on independence in the individual decrees of the ministries containing SSMs
and the progress to date on this recommendation. The peer review team considers it important that
these clear statements on independence are progressively incorporated or clarified as soon as
possible in the decrees of all SSMs.
Improvement action: Inclusion of an independance mention in MSO’s decrees
A3.1 - INSEE intends to put into place and regularly follow-up an operational plan to revise, by the
end of 2027, the relevant decrees of the six Ministerial Statistical Offices (Drees, Dares, Depp,
Justice, Sies, OED), which do not include the mention of professional independence. To this end,
INSEE will work in close collaboration with these Ministerial Statistical Offices and their
hierarchies, while taking advantage of any institutional opportunities that may arise during this
period.
Deadline: 2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Presentation of a report on independance mention in MSO’s decrees to
the ASP
A3.2 - INSEE intends accordingly to present to the French Official Statistics Authority, by the end
of 2024, a progress report relating to the inclusion of a clear statement on professional
independance in the decree of the six MSO concerned (Drees, Dares, Depp, Justice, Sies, OED), in
order for the Authority to then formally require those Ministerial Statistical Offices to fulfil their
related commitments in the event that they have not yet done so.
Deadline: 2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Publication of the MSOs’ Decrees with Independance mention included
A3.3 – Once their respective decree has been duly revised by the inclusion of a clear statement on
professional independance, the six Ministerial Statistical Offices concerned (Drees, Dares, Depp,
Justice, Sies, OED) intend to make reference to it, as far as possible, on their own websites.
Deadline: 2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs
concerned




                                                                                                     5
4. Recommendation:
INSEE and SSMs should complete the systematic use of logos to clearly delineate official statistics
produced by the SSP from other reports and analysis at dissemination. (Improvement-related: ES
CoP, Indicator 1.6)
Current situation:
Currently, approaches vary across the SSP as to how official statistics are branded and identified.
There is potential for confusion in distinguishing between official statistics and other reports and
analysis at dissemination. The peer review team noted the harmonisation work underway to
strengthen the ‘Official Statistical Service brand’ through the use of a shared logo across the SSP,
which would underline the independence of official statistics from other outputs and adherence to
the ES CoP of all members of the SSP.
Improvement action: Design of a logo (with use cases) for the French Official Statistical
service
A4.1 - INSEE along with all the Ministerial Statistical Offices intend to have designed, by the end
of 2023, a new common logo for the French Official Statistical Service, the guidelines for the use
of which will then be published in 2024 on Insee.fr, specifying the precise scope of the publications
concerned by the logo for both INSEE and the Ministerial Statistical Offices.
Deadline: 2023-2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                    6
5. Recommendation:
To holders of administrative data, the Secrétariat Général du Gouvernement (SGG), Direction
générale des Entreprises (DGE), Direction générale des Finances publiques (DGFiP), Direction de
la Sécurité sociale (DSS), INSEE and the SSMs should be more involved in the design,
development and discontinuation of administrative records in order to make them more suitable for
statistical purposes. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicators 2.2 and 8.7)
Current situation:
The SSP has a strong and comprehensive legal mandate for data collection founded in Articles 1,
3bis and 7bis of the Statistical Law No 51-711 of 7 June 1951. The peer review team observed a
high and shared awareness amongst INSEE and the three participating SSMs as to the overall
strengths of this mandate, particularly in relation to access to administrative data sources for the
purposes of compiling official statistics.
In particular, when administrative data are used for official statistical purposes (as set out in Art.
7bis), in order to maximise their statistical potential and ensure continuity and quality in the
production of statistics, it is important that statistical authorities are systematically involved in the
design and subsequent modifications of the administrative data sources.
While the peer review team was informed of examples of good collaboration between the statistical
and administrative authorities on this issue, the need for consultation was identified in all cases
where design or modification of administrative data used for official statistical purposes was
planned.
Improvement action: Identification of the main administrative data sources within Official
Statistical Service
A5.1 - INSEE along with the Ministerial Statistical Offices intend to identify, by the end of 2022,
the main administrative data sources currently used within the French Official Statistical Service.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Definition of guidelines for joint collaboration for administrative data
A5.2 - INSEE along with the Ministerial Statistical Offices intend to define, by the end of 2024,
dedicated guidelines relating to more effectively formalise the joint collaboration with those
entities that supply the French Statistical Service with administrative data, and afterwards to
promote them in order to better take into account the statistical needs in the design and
development of the corresponding data sources. In particular, according to these guidelines, those
providers should commit to informing INSEE about the changes or discontinuation of their data.
Deadline: 2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Implementation of joint collaboration guidelines for administrative
data
A5.3 - INSEE along with the Ministerial Statistical Offices equally intend to implement, by the end
of 2025, the guidelines relating to more effectively formalise the joint collaboration with those
entities that supply the French Statistical Service with administrative data, in order to support those
producers within the French Official Statistical Service involved in setting up new partnerships.
Deadline: 2025
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE and
MSO’s
Improvement action: Development of a statistical register for individuals and housing
A5.4 - INSEE intends to develop, by the end of 2025, a dedicated statistical register (so-called
RESIL) so that those providers of administrative data regarding individuals and housing would
have the opportunity to add to it. Such a register would facilitate the exchange of data within the

                                                                                                        7
Official Statistical Service, while respecting the provisions guaranteeing the confidentiality of data.
Deadline: 2025
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                      8
6. Recommendation:
In future updates of the relevant legislation, INSEE, the DINUM Director (Direction interministé-
rielle du numérique) as Chief Data Officer, Conseiller action publique et numérique au sein du
Cabinet du Premier ministre, should enable wider access to private data for investigation of
statistical potential and should also broaden the scope of use of new data sources beyond that of
replacement data for mandatory surveys. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 2.4)
Current situation:
Concerning access to privately held data, France has been a leading country internationally in the
modernisation of its Statistical Law with a view to enabling, under certain conditions, access to
such data for the production of official statistics. Articles 1 and 19 of the Law for a Digital
Republic, Law No 2016-1321 of 7 October 2016 establish the principle of the obligation to transmit
public or privately held data free of charge for the preparation of official statistics. Furthermore, the
decree implementing Article 3bis of the Statistical Law No 51-711 of 7 June 1951, introduced by
the Law for a Digital Republic, was signed on 31 March 2017. However, the legal impediments
remain and while the transmission of private data for statistical purposes can be made compulsory,
the restrictions around advance trials (requiring prior agreement of data holders) and use of the
transmitted data (solely as a replacement for mandatory surveys) can be a barrier to access. It is
well recognised that the great potential of privately held data for the official statistical community
is not only as a replacement for existing data collection, but also a means of informing policy
decisions on new and emerging phenomena with much more granular and frequent or near real-
time information.
Improvement action: Elaboration of a synthesis on the beneficits & limits of current privately
held data legislation
A6.1 - INSEE intends to draw up, by the end of 2022, a comprehensive synthesis on the respective
benefits and limits of the current legislation, regarding access to privately-held data for producing
statistics, with a view to bringing it to the attention of the directeur de la Direction
interministérielle du numérique, of the Conseiller action publique et numérique au sein du Cabinet
du Premier ministre, as well as of the Directeur du Cabinet du Ministre de l’Economie et des
Finances.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Appointment of an expert advisor for the negotiations of European data
regulations
A6.2 - Concerning the three European projected data regulations (Data Governance Act, Data Act,
ePrivacy), INSEE intends to appoint, by the end of 2021, in the context of the upcoming EU French
Presidency, an expert advisor to fully support in the first half of 2022 the French service
responsible for participating in the on-going negotiations. This is with a view to ensuring that the
needs of official statistics are properly taken into account in these regulations. Moreover, this
expert advisor will be actively committed to supporting the proposed revision of Regulation
223/2009 of 11 March 2009 (revised), in particular with regard to access to privately-held data.
INSEE intends to consider the need to revise the French statistical legislation, once the European
Regulation 223/2009 of 11 March 2009 (revised) has been amended and the Data Act Regulation
has been approved.
Deadline: mid-2022 and 2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                        9
II- Embedding Quality Management throughout the National Statistical System

7. Recommendation:
INSEE and the SSMs should complete the implementation of quality approaches across the SSP as
well as implementation and dissemination of quality reports. (Improvement-related: ES CoP,
Indicator 4.3)
Current situation:
A commitment to systematic and ongoing improvements to the quality of official statistics is
clearly embedded in the strategies and work programmes of INSEE and the SSMs. Strong quality
governance across the SSP is clearly demonstrated and is greatly supported by the Official
Statistics Quality Label Committee (CL), which assesses the technical quality of all surveys
included in the statistical programme. All new surveys must apply for the quality label and all
existing surveys must re-apply for the label after five years.
The creation of the Strategic Committee for Quality (CoSaQ) and the development of a quality
strategy based on five quality guidelines (governance, skills, implementation of quality approaches,
adoption of recommendations and meeting user needs) and its adoption in 2017 by INSEE and the
SSMs was noted by the peer review team. The progress to date on the implementation of the
strategy was also noted, as was the commitment to implement it across the SSP.
INSEE has developed process-based quality approaches consisting of systematic process
description, risk analysis and the subsequent development of an improvement action plan for the
process in question. Implementation of the quality approaches will require significant investment
and the peer review team noted that the quality approaches have been so far implemented for many
processes at INSEE and some processes in the SSMs. INSEE has prepared a diagram of its
statistical production processes and for some processes, the quality approach is missing. All SSMs
participating in the peer review reported that they would like to further implement relevant quality
approaches to their processes.
The importance of improvements in quality reporting is well understood by INSEE and the SSMs
and quality reports are regularly produced for Eurostat but not always made publicly available. In
particu-lar, standardised, user-oriented quality reports are not always published or made available
on the websites of INSEE or the SSMs.
Improvement action: Implementation of quality initiatives for essential processes
A7.1 - For each of those processes producing European statistics and referred to as "essential"
(according to Insee’s Inspection Générale report No. 2020_84 /DG75-B001 of 18 November 2020)
INSEE intends to carry out respectively, by the end of 2027 at the latest (before its fourth peer
review), targeted quality initiatives. For certain of these processes, the initiatives will be
implemented for the first time; for the others, they will take the form of a regular process review.
Deadline: 2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Formalisation and promotion of INSEE’s range of service for quality
initiatives for MSOs
A7.2 - INSEE intends to formalise and promote, by the end of 2023, a range of services dedicated
to the various producers within the Ministerial Statistical Offices with a view to implementing
relevant quality initiatives which take into account the specificity of their respective environments.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE


                                                                                                    10
Improvement action: Definition and implementation of MSOs’ roadmap for quality initiatives
A7.3 - Each Ministerial Statistical Office intends to draw up, by the end of 2024, its own roadmap
setting out a specific plan for implementing, by the end of 2027 at the latest (before its fourth peer
review), relevant quality initiatives regarding its statistical production processes.
Deadline: 2024-2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs
Improvement action: Dissemination of quality reports for « essential » processes
A7.4 - INSEE intends to ensure, by the end of 2027 at the latest (before its fourth peer review), the
dissemination on Insee.fr of the user-oriented sections (ESMS) concerning the quality reports
(using the SIMS format) for all the series relating to those statistical production processes
producing European statistics and referred to as "essential" (according to the Insee’s Inspection
Générale report N° 2020_84 /DG75-B001 of 18 November 2020). This will of course be subject to
the quality reporting required by the respective regulations being compliant with the SIMS format.
Deadline: 2027
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Formalisation and promotion of INSEE’s range of services for quality
reports for MSOs
A7.5 - INSEE intends to formalise and promote, by the end of 2023, subject to a technical
feasibility study, a range of services dedicated to the various producers within the Ministerial
Statistical Offices in order for them to more easily elaborate their SIMS-compliant quality reports
by using the RMéS repository.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                    11
8. Recommendation:
INSEE and the SSMs should further promote the statistical metadata repository (RMéS in French)
in order to fully implement the use of it across the SSP. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator
8.4)
Current situation:
The development of the central statistical metadata repository (RMéS) to support management of
concepts, classifications and information relating to statistical operations was noted by the peer
review team. While the peer review team also noted the commitment to implementation across the
SSP, full use of RMéS is currently not in place.
Improvement action: Formalisation and promotion of a range of services for statistical
metadata repository within INSEE
A8.1 - INSEE intends to formalise and promote, by the end of 2023, a range of services dedicated
to its various producers in order for them to comprehensively describe their concepts and
classifications for the RMéS repository.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Formalisation and promotion of INSEE’s range of services for
statistical métadata repository for MSOs
A8.2 - INSEE in close collaboration with the Ministerial Statistical Offices intends to formalise and
promote, by the end of 2023, subject to a technical feasibility study, a range of services dedicated to
the various producers within the Ministerial Statistical Offices in order for them to
comprehensively describe for the RMéS repository those concepts and classifications, which are
under their sole ownership.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE


9. Recommendation:
INSEE should standardise documentation used for internal processes, in particular statistical
procedures, in order to ensure operational continuity in the case of staff turnover. (Improvement-
related: ES CoP, Indicator 8.4)
Current situation:
Observing the high staff mobility within INSEE, the internal documentation practices are of high
importance. The quality approaches commence with a process description, which may be a good
starting point for further standardisation of internal documentation. As part of harmonisation to
underpin quality and to ensure operational continuity in the case of staff turnover, it is important to
ensure that documentation for internal processes is standardised, structured, accessible, readable
and up-to-date.
Improvement action: Formalisation of a framework for a documentation of statistical
production processes
A9.1 - After having experimented it on a diversity of processes, INSEE intends to formalise, by the
end of 2025 at the latest, the organisational framework for a template to be used for documenting
all the statistical production processes. This template will then be submitted in 2026 for approval to
the Strategic Committee on Quality.
Deadline: 2025-2026
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE

                                                                                                     12
10. Recommendation:
INSEE and the SSMs should complete the implementation of the revision and error policies across
the SSP. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicators 6.3 and 12.3)
Current situation:
INSEE and SSMs have committed to announcing and publishing revisions and corrections of errors
on their websites. While there have been divergences observed in practices in the past, INSEE and
SSMs have developed a plan to harmonise these practices. In 2019, INSEE formalised a general
revision policy that is available on the INSEE website and sets out the rules to be followed when
deciding on revisions and when organising, documenting and publishing revisions. This policy has
inspired a shared revision policy for the SSMs, which was drawn up in 2020 and which most of the
SSMs have published on their websites. In 2020, a working group made up of representatives of
INSEE and the SSMs developed a shared error correction policy and protocol for measuring,
rectifying and reporting errors that has yet to be formally adopted before implementation.
Improvement action: Publication of the revision and error correction policies
A10.1 - INSEE as well as each Ministerial Statistical Office intend to make, by the end of 2022,
their revision and error correction policies available on their respective websites. INSEE also
intends to publish the related error correction protocol on the French Official Statistical Service
intranet site.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE and
MSOs
Improvement action: Raising awareness of the dissemination staff about the revision and
error correction policies
A10.2 - INSEE intends, by the end of 2022, to draw the attention of its agents working within its
Department for Dissemination to the revision and error correction policies and protocol.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Inclusion of revision and error correction policies in the quality training
course
A10.3 - Moreover, INSEE intends to include, from 2023 onwards, a specific module on their
revision and error correction policies in our Quality awareness-raising training courses, which are
regularly provided across all the SSP.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                 13
11. Recommendation:
The SSMs should review their pre-release access arrangements to ensure harmonised adherence to
the ES CoP, in particular in relation to the number of users having pre-release access. (Im-
provement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 6.7)
Current situation:
The procedures for pre-release access at INSEE and across the SSMs are transparent and were re-
viewed in 2017. At that time, the interval between transmission of pre-release material and
publication of results was further minimised.
However, the peer review team identified a potential for further rationalisation and limitation of the
number of users benefiting from pre-release access across the SSMs.
Improvement action: Drawing up a list of beneficiaries of pre-release access for each MSO
A11.1 - Each Ministerial Statistical Office intends to annually draw up, from 2022 onwards, the list
of those stakeholders who benefit – due to their particular functions - from pre-release access
arrangements, and intends to bring this first to the attention of the Statistical Programme
Committee (CPS), then to the French Official Statistics Authority, and to publish all these pre-
release access arrangements on its respective website.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs


12. Recommendation:
INSEE should review its arrangements for secure and controlled transmission of pre-release
material to ensure safe and managed transmission of the related material. (Improvement-related: ES
CoP, Indicator 6.7)
Current situation:
The procedures for pre-release access at INSEE and across the SSMs are transparent and were re-
viewed in 2017. At that time, the interval between transmission of pre-release material and
publication of results was further minimised.
The peer review team identified opportunities for improving security around the processes for
transmitting pre-release material.
Improvement action: Drawing up a message for pre-release material
A12.1 - INSEE intends to draw up, by the end of 2022, a dedicated message to be duly attached to
all pre-release material, drawing the attention of the beneficiaries concerned to the requirements
they need to comply with, as well as to the potential sanctions they would be exposed to in the
event of any embargo breach. This message will also be made publicly available on Insee.fr.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Integration of the term « embargoed » on pre-release material
A12.2 - INSEE intends to clearly and visibly mark, by the end of 2022, the term “embargoed” on
all pre-release material.
Deadline: 2022
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                    14
III- Meeting Changing User Needs in a Changing Data Environment

13. Recommendation:
SSMs should use a wider range of communication channels as appropriate, including social media
platforms. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 15.2)
Current situation:
Wide-ranging arrangements exist to consult users on their needs for official statistics, including the
National Council for Statistical Information (CNIS in French) and its thematic working groups.
INSEE has launched a project to comprehensively redesign dissemination processes. The Melodi
project plans accessibility improvements by offering new open data services including a catalogue
of outputs, a data mining function that builds tables on demand, a mass downloading tool, options
to print tables on demand and an API covering all disseminated databases.
With the growth in the number of communication channels, particularly social media platforms, the
peer review team identified areas for improvement across the SSP related to maximising the
potential to engage with a wider audience of users through these new channels.
Improvement action: Elaboration of a synthesis of the benefits and limits of communication
channels
A13.1 - INSEE, in close cooperation with all the Ministerial Statistical Offices, intends to draw up,
by the end of 2023, a synthesis of the respective benefits and limits regarding the potential future
communication channels which could be used by these Offices. This synthesis would then be
brought in 2024 to the attention of the strategic committee dedicated to dissemination and
communication, within the French Official Statistical Service (CODICOM-SSP).
Deadline: 2023-2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Definition of MSOs’ communication strategies
A13.2 - Each Ministerial Statistical Office intends to define, by the end of 2024, its own
communication strategy, making best use of the various channels set up by INSEE, if and when
relevant.
Deadline: 2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs
Improvement action: Providing support for MSOs’ communication strategies
A13.3 – INSEE intends, from 2025 onwards, to provide appropriate support for the implementation
of their social medias communication strategies, as and where requested by each Ministerial
Statistical Office.
Deadline: 2025
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                    15
14. Recommendation:
INSEE should improve the navigation of its website for all user types and should further optimise
the website search engine to provide improved accessibility. (Improvement-related: ES CoP,
Indicator 15.2.)
Current situation:
Wide-ranging arrangements exist to consult users on their needs for official statistics, including the
National Council for Statistical Information (CNIS in French) and its thematic working groups.
INSEE has launched a project to comprehensively redesign dissemination processes. The Melodi
project plans accessibility improvements by offering new open data services including a catalogue
of outputs, a data mining function that builds tables on demand, a mass downloading tool, options
to print tables on demand and an API covering all disseminated databases.
The peer review team identified opportunities to optimise experience for all types of users – expert
and casual – who engage with the INSEE website.
Improvement action: Improvement of the search engine and data access on the website
A14.1 - INSEE intends to improve both the organisation of its information and the settings of its
search engine, taking into account user feedback regarding those statistics which have proved the
most difficult to find on the website. This modification will be shared from 2023 onwards with the
CODICOM (the strategic committee dedicated to dissemination and communication) via an annual
report. Moreover, with a view to monitoring the impact of all the actions set up to further improve
data access, INSEE intends, from 2023 onwards, to report annually to the CODICOM on the level
of satisfaction of its Insee.fr users (a level which is already regularly monitored).
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE
Improvement action: Releasing a catalogue of INSEE’s datasets on the website
A14.2 - INSEE intends to release a comprehensive catalogue of all its datasets on insee.fr, both in
French and in English (an example of a dataset catalogue can be found on data.gouv.fr). This
catalogue will allow the users to navigate throughout Insee’s data and its various formats. A first
version of this catalogue will be released by the end of 2025 based on Insee’s main sources
(macroeconomic, local and structural business statistics, census).
Deadline: 2025
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE




                                                                                                    16
15. Recommendation:
INSEE should improve access to its dissemination databases for all users, particularly via Explorer
and API web services. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicators 15.2 and 15.5)
Current situation:
Wide-ranging arrangements exist to consult users on their needs for official statistics, including the
National Council for Statistical Information (CNIS in French) and its thematic working groups.
INSEE has launched a project to comprehensively redesign dissemination processes. The Melodi
project plans accessibility improvements by offering new open data services including a catalogue
of outputs, a data mining function that builds tables on demand, a mass downloading tool, options
to print tables on demand and an API covering all disseminated databases.
The peer review team furthermore, identified opportunities to optimise experience for all types of
users – expert and casual – who engage with disseminate databases.
Improvement action: Enhancing access to INSEE’s key statistical datasets via API and data
explorer tool
A15.1 - INSEE intends to make available to all its users, by the end of 2025, its key statistical
datasets (including national accounts, structural business statistics, census results) via a unique
standard API web service as well as a practical data explorer tool.
Deadline: 2025
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: INSEE


16. Recommendation:
SSMs should investigate the possibility of expanding access to microdata for research purposes and
implement it where possible. (Improvement-related: ES CoP, Indicator 15.4)
Current situation:
Improvements in the levels of access to microdata for researchers, and the related protocols, were
noted as was the role of the Statistical Confidentiality Committee (CSS) in approving requests for
access to data from across the SSP, either directly or via the access centres, Quetelet-Progedo and
the Secure Access Data Centre (CASD). To further support the research community, and as
researcher access to administrative data is currently limited, broadening of access for researchers to
administrative data was identified as an improvement opportunity.
Improvement action: Definition of a roadmap for MSOs supply of micro-data
A16.1 - Each Ministerial Statistical Office concerned intends to define, by the end of 2024, a
roadmap to further develop its supply of micro-data to researchers, in particular via the Secure
Access Data Centre (CASD in French).
Deadline: 2024
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs
concerned
Improvement action: Broadening MSO’s access protocol for researchers
A16.2 - Each Ministerial Statistical Office intends to define, by the end of 2023, its own protocol
for broadening access for researchers to those administrative data that the ministerial Statistical
Office use for its own statistical purposes, subject to the agreement of the administrative authorities
concerned.
Deadline: 2023
Responsible institution for the improvement action and each of its sub-actions: MSOs



                                                                                                     17
